---
layout: post
title: "CSS classes and Django form fields"
date: 2014-09-30 11:00:00 -0700
comments: true
categories: django python
---

Django forms provide input validation and HTML form field generation.  They also integrate nicely with models.  However, Django itself does not allow one-off customizations of form-generated HTML.

In this post I will discuss a method for customizing the HTML generated by Django form fields, with the specific goal of adding custom CSS classes to Django form fields.

Here's a Django form definition:

```python
from django import forms

class AuthenticationForm(forms.Form):
    username = forms.CharField(max_length=254)
    password = forms.CharField(widget=forms.PasswordInput)
```

Here's the form used in a template:

{% raw %}
    {{ form.as_p }}
{% endraw %}

## The Problem

We're using [Bootstrap][] and we want to add an `input-lg` CSS class onto our username field to make it really big.


## The Solution(s)

There are many ways to solve this problem.  I will discuss some solutions I dislike before I discuss my preferred solution.

### Using a form widget attribute

We could add a `class` attribute to our Django form field:

```python
from django import forms

class AuthenticationForm(forms.Form):
    username = forms.CharField(
        max_length=254,
        widget=forms.TextInput(attrs={'class': "input-lg"}),
    )
    password = forms.CharField(widget=forms.PasswordInput)
```

I dislike this approach because it requires including presentation rules in our back-end code.  This class attribute is used exclusively by our CSS and/or JavaScript and should therefore live in Django templates, not in Python code.

### Using django-floppyforms

If we're using [django-floppyforms][] we could include logic in our `floppyforms/attrs.html` template to add specific classes based on a context variable ([example][floppy attrs]).  Here's an example:

{% raw %}
    {% for name, value in attrs.items %} {{ name }}{% if value != True %}="{{ value }}{% if name == "class" %} {{ extra_classes }}{% endif %}"{% endfor %}
{% endraw %}

This should work but it's ugly and in general I do not enjoy maintaining heavy logic in my templates.

<aside>Aside: there is currently an [open issue][floppy issue] on django-floppyforms discussing how this could be added as a feature to the library.</aside>

### Using django-widget-tweaks

I prefer to solve this problem with [django-widget-tweaks][].

The django-widget-tweaks library provides two solutions to this problem:

1. `add_class` template filter
2. `render_field` template tag.

#### The add_class template filter

[Mikhail Korobov][kmike] originally created the [django-widget-tweaks][] library in 2011.  It started as a series of template filters for modifying form field attributes from your Django templates.

Here's an example usage of the `add_class` filter for adding a CSS class to our form field:

{% raw %}
    {% load widget_tweaks %}
    <p>
        {{ form.username|add_class:"input-lg" }}
        {{ form.username.errors }}
    </p>
    <p>
        {{ form.password }}
        {{ form.password.errors }}
    </p>
{% endraw %}

I find this solution both easy to read and easy to maintain.

#### The render_field template tag

I discovered [django-widget-tweaks][] shortly after [Mikhail][kmike] created it.  I appreciated his solution for this problem, but I wanted a more HTML-like syntax for my form field customizations.  I created the `render_field` template tag to satisfy that desire.

With the `render_field` tag you can add attributes to form fields with a much more HTML-like syntax:

{% raw %}
    {% load widget_tweaks %}
    <p>
        {% render_field form.username class+="input-lg" %}
        {{ form.username.errors }}
    </p>
    <p>
        {% render_field form.password %}
        {{ form.password.errors }}
    </p>
{% endraw %}

As a bonus, with `render_field` we can also set a CSS class for erroneous and required form fields.  See [the documentation][docs] for more details.

## Conclusion

I have not had a chance to use [django-floppyforms][] yet, but I expect that [django-widget-tweaks][] and django-floppyforms would integrate well together.

I am on the lookout for new solutions to this problem, but django-widget-tweaks has served me well so far.  I have used it for three years now it remains one of my go-to libraries for new Django projects.

How do you add CSS classes do your Django form fields?  If you have another solution please leave a comment below.


[docs]: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-widget-tweaks#render-field
[bootstrap]: http://getbootstrap.com/
[django-floppyforms]: https://django-floppyforms.readthedocs.org/
[floppy attrs]: https://github.com/grundleborg/django-floppyforms-bootstrap3/blob/9ab0261eb8ae0c939e4ad01066716e445357cb95/floppyforms_bootstrap3/templates/floppyforms/attrs.html
[floppy issue]: https://github.com/gregmuellegger/django-floppyforms/issues/99
[django-widget-tweaks]: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-widget-tweaks
[kmike]: http://kmike.ru/pages/about/
